Add 3.10.1.0 changelogs and remove the used up tiny changlog files (#8831)
haskell/cabal: release-notes/cabal-install-3.10.1.0.md

cabal-install and cabal-install-solver 3.10.1.0 changelog and release notes
---

Release 3.10.1.0 of cabal now sets the `--enable-documentation` option by default
when running `cabal haddock` (https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7462).

> If that new default does not fit your workflow, pass an explicit `--disable-documentation`

Author: Done.

  - Removes these flags (which never worked) from v2-install

- No global packages auto written to env files, allow --force-reinstalls [#5559](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/5559) [#6165](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/6165) [#8607](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8607)

  - When v2-install runs on a library, it does not pin global packages in the env file, only those directly necessary for the library.

- Add support for ghc-9.4s -fprof-late flag. [#8528](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8528)

- This adds the new `late-toplevel` (and its alias `late`) profiling-detail option which enables `-fprof-late`-based automatic cost centre annotations for GHCs that support it ([earliest is GHC 9.4.1](https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/9.4.1/docs/users_guide/profiling.html#ghc-flag--fprof-late)).

### Other changes

- Pretty-print run targets on failure [#8189](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8189) [#8234](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8234)

  - Targets of the `run` command are pretty-printed when failing due to multiple targets.
  - Duplicate targets are removed in the output.

> - Expose BuildFlags and ClientHaddockFlags [#8351](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8351) [#8353](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8353)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Expose `BuildFlags` and `ClientHaddockFlags` [#8351](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8351) [#8353](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8353)
```

  in this patch: now you'll see '-O2'.

- `ghc`, `ghc-boot`, `ghci` packages should be non-upgradable [#8489](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8489) [#8501](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8501)

  - Changed both `Distribution.Client.Dependency`'s `dontUpgradeNonUpgradeablePackages`
    and `Distribution.Solver.Modular.Solver`'s `nonInstallable` to be in sync.

- Apply command line flags to install packages [#8637](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8637) [#8779](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8779)

  - Command line flags usually only apply to "local" packages (packages specified
    in the cabal.project). This change causes the v2-install command to ignore
    that distinction to better match the expected behavior for packages specified
    directly in the command.

- Make sure Haskell files in explicit source directories take precedence over autogenerated Haskell files [#8689](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8689) [#8690](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8690)

  - Changed order or directories in GHC invocation so that source
    directories explicitly specified in cabal file will be considered
    before Cabal’s internal build directory.

> - Added haddock-project command [#7669](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7669) [#8162](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8162)

Reviewer: Adding a new subcommand sounds like a significant change to me. Pull?

> - Added haddock-project command [#7669](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7669) [#8162](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8162)

Reviewer: Adding a new subcommand sounds like a significant change to me. Pull? Also, backticks:

```suggestion
- Added `haddock-project` command [#7669](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7669) [#8162](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8162)
```

  The `haddock-project` command can be used to build documentation of multiple
  packages.  By passing `--local` option the directory will be self contained,
  by passing `--hackage` links to dependencies will link to `hackage`.  Both
  `--local` and `--hackage` options imply `--quickfix`, `--gen-index`,
  `--gen-contents`, and `--hyperlinked-source`.

  Building self contained directory is the default, unless `--hackage` or
  `--html-location`.

  The PR #8162 also fixes the `--with-haddock` option.

- Print a warning when assertions are enabled [#4377](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/4377) [#8240](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8240)

  - Now cabal-install executable will print a warning if assertions are enabled

> - Implement --prefer-oldest [#8261](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8261)
> 
>   - Implement `--prefer-oldest` flag for Cabal solver, which tries to find a build plan with the oldest versions possible. This is useful to establish lower bounds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implement `--prefer-oldest` [#8261](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8261)

  - The new flag makes Cabal solver try to find a build plan with the oldest versions possible. This is useful to establish lower bounds.
```

- Update and sdist now only check for compiler when project file has conditionals [#8352](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8352) [#8550](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8550) [#8589](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8589) [#8358](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8358) [#8627](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8627)

  - Cabal update and sdist will not require a ghc in path unless the project has conditionals that require it

- Allow offline bootstrapping of cabal-install [#8368](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8368)

  - The bootstrap script for cabal-install now supports fetching the sources of the dependencies in a separate step.
    One can then copy over the resulting archive and perform offline bootstrapping of cabal-install.

- Pass some haddock flags to dependencies [#395](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/395) [#8104](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8104) [#8414](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8414)

>   - Pass "--haddock-hoogle", "--haddock-html", "--haddock-internal", "--haddock-quickjump", "--haddock-hyperlinked-source"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Pass `--haddock-hoogle`, `--haddock-html`, `--haddock-internal`, `--haddock-quickjump`, `--haddock-hyperlinked-source`
```

    to all the dependencies if they are specified as command line args

- build pkgconfig db individually when bulk fails [#8494](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8494) [#8496](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8496)

  - When pkg-config fails to get versions for all packages in bulk, falls back to querying one-by-one.

- improve install target handling logic regarding of project files [#8094](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8094) [#8352](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8352) [#8498](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8498)

>   - fixes an issue where cabal install pkg-x.y.z fails unless --ignore-project is given
>   - fixes an issue where cabal install --ignore-project crashes when project file is present

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - fixes an issue where `cabal install pkg-x.y.z` fails unless `--ignore-project` is given
  - fixes an issue where `cabal install --ignore-project` crashes when a project file is present
```

> - Redownload pkgs when source hash verification fails [#7541](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7541) [#8500](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8500)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Redownload packages when source hash verification fails [#7541](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7541) [#8500](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8500)
```

  - Cabal-install will verify source hashes on cached downloads against the current index, and redownload on mismatch. (Which can occur with e.g. head.hackage)

> - cabal init -i should sanitize package name guessed from the directory name [#8404](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8404) [#8561](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8561)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `cabal init -i` should sanitize package name guessed from the directory name [#8404](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8404) [#8561](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8561)
```

>   If the current directory name has any non-alphanumeric symbol in its name, the symbol will be replaced with a dash. Also, will make sure that the resulting package name starts with a letter.

Reviewer 2: symbol → symbols (two occourrences)

  This worked for cabal init -n already, and this PR only moves code around so that cabal init -i also benefits from this logic.

- Support `js-sources` with GHC, not only with GHCJS [#8636](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8636)

>   - Take into account js-sources when building library components with GHC
>   - Missing support for js-sources in executable components is tracked in #8639

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Take into account `js-sources` when building library components with GHC
  - Missing support for `js-sources` in executable components is tracked in #8639
```

> - Fix extra-source-file rebuild tracking when run in a multi-package project [#8632](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8632) [#8634](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8634) [#8640](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8640)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fix `extra-source-file` rebuild tracking when run in a multi-package project [#8632](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8632) [#8634](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8634) [#8640](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8640)
```

>   - Fixes an issue where glob expansion of extra-source-files for rebuild tracking purposes was not occuring correctly when run in a multi-package setting (i.e. when the globs needed to be expanded relative to something other than ".").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Fixes an issue where glob expansion of `extra-source-files` for rebuild tracking purposes was not occurring correctly when run in a multi-package setting (i.e. when the globs needed to be expanded relative to something other than ".").
```

- No up-front warning that assertions are on for special commands (help, version, numeric-version) [#8645](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8645) [#8647](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8647)

  - When compiled with ghc option `-fno-ignore-assert`, `cabal-install` will issue a generic warning that assertions are on.
    This warning will no longer be emitted for special modes of operation like `cabal --numeric-version`, `--version` and help,
    and also not if `cabal` could not parse its command line.
    Further, the warning now goes to `stderr` rather than `stdout`.

> - Fix and improve list parser of cabal init cli [#8659](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8659) [#8663](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8663)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fix and improve list parser for `cabal init` arguments [#8659](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8659) [#8663](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8663)
```

  Occurrences of 'Flag [a]' seem to behave in an unexpected way. The monoid
  instance of 'Flag' is right associative and discard the value on the
  left, but we want to merge the contents of 'Flag'.

  Permits:

>   - cabal init -d base -d vector -d containers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `cabal init -d base -d vector -d containers`
```

  Fixes for all Flag '[a]' the cli parser in cabal init. Adds cli parser tests.

  Adds the feature to specify a comma-separated list of dependencies:

>   - cabal init -d base,vector,containers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `cabal init -d base,vector,containers`
```

- Fix resolution of imports by relative paths in cabal.project [#8686](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8686)

  Fix bug where cabal tries to resolve imports by relative paths against
  the directory cabal executable was invoked in rather than directory of
  cabal.project file that does the import.

- Add warning for running cabal run, cabal test and cabal bench with +RTS flag [#8709](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8709)

  This adds a warning when RTS options are passed to cabal instead of the binary
  for the commands 'run', 'bench' and 'test', as most users want to pass these
  options to their binary.

> - Fix repl discarding --build-depends [#6859](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/6859) [#7081](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7081) [#8732](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8732)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fix `cabal repl` discarding `--build-depends` [#6859](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/6859) [#7081](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7081) [#8732](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8732)
```

  - Fix `repl` command discarding `--build-depends` argument when using
    `allow-newer` or `allow-older`.

- Add `cabal get --only-package-description` [#1954](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/1954) [#1977](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/1977) [#5162](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/5162) [#8263](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8263)

- `cabal haddock` now implies `--enable-documentation` [#7462](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7462) [#8259](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8259)

> - cabal init: suggest BSD-3 as default license [#8757](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8757) [#8764](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8764)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `cabal init`: suggest BSD-3 as default license [#8757](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8757) [#8764](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8764)
```

> - Include extra-lib-dirs-static into PackageHash [#6935](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/6935) [#7794](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/7794)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Include `extra-lib-dirs-static` into `PackageHash` [#6935](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/6935) [#7794](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/7794)
```

- Document `cabal check` in the user guide [#8237](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8237)

> - Add documentation for cabal-install commands: user-config, [#7884](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7884) [#7978](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7978) [#8308](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8308) [#8309](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8309)

Reviewer: Why the comma after user-config?

Author: Hah, apparently the different PRs concern different other commands, so there must be more. Let me cheat and add "and other commands".

Author: Done. And it says it's only about cabal-install, but is mentioned also in the Cabal changelog, so I removed it from there.

> - Add documentation for cabal-install commands: user-config and other commands [#7884](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7884) [#7978](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7978) [#8308](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8308) [#8309](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8309)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add documentation (or stubs) for cabal-install commands: `fetch`, `get`, `info`, `init`, `list`, `report`, `unpack`, `upload`, `user-config` [#7884](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7884) [#7978](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7978) [#8308](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8308) [#8309](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8309)
```

> - Add check for upper bound on any dependency in cabal check [#8291](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8291) [#8339](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8339)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add check for upper bound on any dependency in `cabal check` [#8291](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/8291) [#8339](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/pull/8339)
```
